# Security Testing

Alongside other non-functional considerations such as accessibility, performance
and usability, is **security**.

## What & Why?

Security testing essentially looks for vulnerabilities in an application or
system. These vulnerabilities represent risks to an organisation as they could
be deliberately exploited or accidentally encountered, resulting in fallout from
temporary downtime to private data being leaked.

Like with any other bugs, testing is designed to identify these vulnerabilities
so that they can be fixed (if required). Also, it's another testing activity
that can - and should! - be done as early as possible, even if that means the
security testing activities are working from plans and designs, attempting to
determine potential vulnerabilities or threats to the upcoming implementation.

## Who Does It?

Security testing is a wide-ranging, technically complex world which is
constantly battling against new threats, malicious parties and newly emerging
techniques. As such, there's a whole profession out there for specialist
security testers, including companies of them to which security testing can be
outsourced for a fee.

For the testing profession more generally, it's still important to understand
security, the types of vulnerabilities, potential tools and so on, so that
security testing can be considered and executed along with other non-functional
test activities.

In this phase, you'll be learning about these things in order to give you a good
understanding of the importance of security testing and some ways to approach
it.

## Penetration Testing

You may have heard the term "penetration testing" before and it is valuable to
understand what it is and its relationship to security testing.

In short, penetration testing is a simulated "attack" on a system, done by
someone who has permission to do so. Penetration testing is part of security
testing.

Here are some comparisons between security testing and penetration testing:

* Security testing can be done at any point in the SDLC, including at the design
  phase i.e. [secure by design](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_by_design).
  Penetration testing can only happen later on, once code is written and running
  somewhere - either production or somewhere that's considered close enough to
  production as to be a valuable test.
* Security testing is a more general range of activities that are focused on
  security, from simply identifying systems within scope to be considered,
  through to "passively scanning" for known vulnerabilities. Penetration testing
  is an end-to-end test which evaluates the implemented system's current status
  and identifies vulnerabilities by attacking it.
* Security testing can be done by almost anyone; software testers may need to do
  some security testing or think about security testing in their jobs.
  Penetration testing requires a more specialist set of skills and knowledge;
  penetration testers tend to have become specialists in that field and is
  likely to be their primary job.

[Next Challenge](02_warning.md)

<!-- BEGIN GENERATED SECTION DO NOT EDIT -->

---

**How was this resource?**  
[😫](https://airtable.com/shrUJ3t7KLMqVRFKR?prefill_Repository=makersacademy%2Fextending-testing&prefill_File=phase4%2F01_security_testing.md&prefill_Sentiment=😫) [😕](https://airtable.com/shrUJ3t7KLMqVRFKR?prefill_Repository=makersacademy%2Fextending-testing&prefill_File=phase4%2F01_security_testing.md&prefill_Sentiment=😕) [😐](https://airtable.com/shrUJ3t7KLMqVRFKR?prefill_Repository=makersacademy%2Fextending-testing&prefill_File=phase4%2F01_security_testing.md&prefill_Sentiment=😐) [🙂](https://airtable.com/shrUJ3t7KLMqVRFKR?prefill_Repository=makersacademy%2Fextending-testing&prefill_File=phase4%2F01_security_testing.md&prefill_Sentiment=🙂) [😀](https://airtable.com/shrUJ3t7KLMqVRFKR?prefill_Repository=makersacademy%2Fextending-testing&prefill_File=phase4%2F01_security_testing.md&prefill_Sentiment=😀)  
Click an emoji to tell us.

<!-- END GENERATED SECTION DO NOT EDIT -->
